Readme for Static Linkage Checker (#214)
GoogleCloudPlatform/cloud-opensource-java: library-best-practices/glossary.md

### Types of conflicts and compatibility

> - **Linkage error**: an error when a Java class in a classpath has reference to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Linkage error**: an error when a Java class in a classpath has a reference to
```

>   another class file for a class, field or method, and the reference can not be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  another class file for a class, field, or method, and the reference cannot be
```

  satisfied with the available classes in the classpath.
  A linkage error is caused by a reference to missing classes or a linkage conflict.
  Linkage errors detected at runtime manifest as `ReflectiveOperationException`,
  `NoClassDefFoundError`, `NoSuchFieldException`, `MethodNotFoundException`,
  `LinkageError`, or other related exceptions.
  - Sub-type: **Linkage conflict**

> - **Linkage conflict**: The signature, return type, modifiers, or throws

Reviewer: I think we should indent "linkage conflict" since it is a subtype of "linkage error", and also add a definition for a term referring to missing things.

### Types of conflicts and compatibility

- **Linkage error**: an error when a Java class in a classpath references

>   another class (for the class itself, its field, or its method), and the reference

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  another class (as a class literal, a field reference, or a method reference), and the reference
```

Author: Updated as

> (as a class literal, a field access, or a method invocation)

  cannot be satisfied with the available classes in the classpath.

>   A linkage error is caused by a reference to missing classes or a linkage conflict.

Reviewer 2: I think this line duplicates the "sub-types" below and can be deleted.

Author: Right. Removed.

  Linkage errors detected at runtime manifest as `ReflectiveOperationException`,
  `NoClassDefFoundError`, `NoSuchFieldException`, `MethodNotFoundException`,
  `LinkageError`, or other related exceptions.
  - Sub-type: **Linkage conflict**
  - Sub-type: **Missing class error**

>   - **Linkage conflict**: The signature, return type, modifiers, or throws

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this should be nested.

Author: to discuss with @garrettjonesgoogle .

>     declaration of a non-private method or class in a dependency has changed in an

Reviewer 2: "changed" is perhaps not right when referring to deleting a method.

Also, what about field references?

Author: Added mention to removal and field.

    incompatible way between the version supplied at compile time and the version
    invoked at runtime. For example, a public method may be removed from a class
    or a class may be made final.
    - Or, another perspective: In cases where binary compatibility and source
      compatibility are the same, a linkage conflict is when compilation would
      fail if the libraries in the classpath were all built together from their
      originating source code, or when reflection would fail.
    - Opposite: **Linkage-compatible**.
    - Sub-type: **Static linkage conflict**: A linkage conflict caused by a direct
      code reference (non-reflective).
    - Sub-type: **Reflective linkage conflict**: A linkage conflict caused by a
      reflective reference.

  - **Missing class error**: an error when a class referenced does not exist
    in the classpath. This error happens when a class is removed in a different
    version of a library, or there is a dependency missed when constructing the classpath.

  - **Static**: Said of a linkage error when the linkage error is caused by a

>     direct code reference (e.g., _static linkage error_ and _static linkage conflict_').

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    direct code reference (e.g., _static linkage error_ and _static linkage conflict_).
```

Author: Fixed

  A linkage error is caused by a reference to missing classes or a linkage conflict.
  Linkage errors detected at runtime manifest as `ReflectiveOperationException`,
  `NoClassDefFoundError`, `NoSuchFieldException`, `MethodNotFoundException`,
  `LinkageError`, or other related exceptions.
  - Sub-type: **Linkage conflict**
  - Sub-type: **Missing class error**

  - **Linkage conflict**: The signature, return type, modifiers, or throws
    declaration of a non-private method or class in a dependency has changed in an
    incompatible way between the version supplied at compile time and the version
    invoked at runtime. For example, a public method may be removed from a class
    or a class may be made final.
    - Or, another perspective: In cases where binary compatibility and source
      compatibility are the same, a linkage conflict is when compilation would
      fail if the libraries in the classpath were all built together from their
      originating source code, or when reflection would fail.
    - Opposite: **Linkage-compatible**.
    - Sub-type: **Static linkage conflict**: A linkage conflict caused by a direct
      code reference (non-reflective).

>     - Sub-type: **Reflective linkage conflict**: A linkage conflict caused by a

Reviewer: Generally "dynamic" is the opposite of "static".

Author: Updated

- **Linkage-matchable version** (said of a particular version of A in relation
  to all versions of B): There exists some version of B such that the version of
  A and the version of B are linkage-compatible.

> ### Static Linkage Check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Static Linkage Checking
```

Reviewer 3: I feel like we should be defining states here; that is, static linkage and static linkage errors; not processes such as a check

> - **Static linkage check**: a process to identify the existence of _static

Reviewer 3: I don't think this definition is needed since it's not fundamental.

  linkage conflicts_ for a given classpath, by scanning Java classes and
  verifying the availability in the classpath.

- **Class usage graph**: a possibly cyclic directed graph of references between classes
  in the classpath. The nodes (vertices) of the graph correspond to
  Java classes and the directed edges are references between classes.
  For example, when 'Class A' has reference to 'Class B' on calling a method X,
  the class usage graph holds an edge between two nodes:

  ```
  [Class A] --(method X of class B)-> [Class B]
  ```

  In this case, 'Class A' is called the _source class_ of the reference and
  'Class B' is called the _destination class_.

  In general, there can be multiple (parallel) edges between two nodes when

>   a class is calling two or more methods and fields on another class.

Reviewer 3: a class references two or more methods and fields of another class.

  Self-loops (references between the same class) are possible and

>   common, however, it is safe to omit such references during static linkage checks,

Reviewer 3: common. However,

>   because the self-loop references are ensured to be linkage compatible by Java compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  because the self-loop references are ensured to be linkage compatible by the Java compiler.
```

>   because the self-loop references are ensured to be linkage compatible by Java compiler.

Reviewer 3: active voice: the Java compiler ensures self-references are linkage compatible.

- **A reference**: in the class usage graph, the relationship between two 

>   classes is either _class reference_, _method reference_ or _field reference_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  classes is either a _class reference_, _method reference_ or _field reference_.
```

  A _method reference_ indicates that the source class invokes a (static or
  non-static) method of the destination class.

  A _field reference_ indicates that the source class accesses a (static or
  non-static) field of the destination class.

  A _class reference_ indicates that the source class uses the destination
  class without referencing a specific field or method (e.g., class inheritance).

> - **Static linkage error**: a reported error for a reference as the result of

Reviewer: I feel like this notion belongs in the "Types of conflicts and compatibility" section, although probably with some modification so that it fits. In particular, we need need a general notion of an error beyond just conflicts (the missing case), without any reference to running a tool.

>   a static linkage check.

Reviewer 3: Again, I think we can define the problem without reference to how or whether it's checked.

>   A static linkage error contains the information on the source class and

Reviewer 3: This sounds like you're describing s class (contains information) rather than a state or better yet, a mathematical property of a certain list.

  the destination class of the reference. Each static linkage error has
  one of the three types:

>   - _Missing class type_ is for errors when where the destination class of a

Reviewer 3: delete "is for errors when where "

    class reference does not exist in the classpath. This error
    happens when a class is removed in a different version of a library,

>     or there is a dependency missed when constructing the classpath.

Reviewer 3: there is a dependency missed --> a dependency is missing

    The reference that causes a missing class error is called a _dangling reference_.

>   - _Missing method type_ is for errors when a method reference has a static

Reviewer 3: delete "is for errors when"

    linkage conflict.

>   - _Missing field type_ is for errors when a field reference has a static

Reviewer 3: delete "is for errors when"

     linkage conflict.

> - **Reachability** is the attribute of static linkage errors to indicate

Reviewer: I think we are tying our terms too much to the "static" type of linkage errors; for several  of these terms, there is no inherent reason that they should be limited to static linkage errors - they could apply to dynamic linkage errors too. 

Also, I feel like "reachability" should be defined as an attribute of references, not linkage errors.

Reviewer 3: agreed

- **Linkage-matchable version** (said of a particular version of A in relation
  to all versions of B): There exists some version of B such that the version of
  A and the version of B are linkage-compatible.

### Static Linkage Check

- **Static linkage check**: a process to identify the existence of static
  linkage errors for a given classpath, by scanning Java classes and
  verifying the availability in the classpath.

> - **Static linkage report**: the outcome of a static linkage check. It reports

Author: Removed.

### Static Linkage Check

- **Static linkage check**: a process to identify the existence of static
  linkage errors for a given classpath, by scanning Java classes and
  verifying the availability in the classpath.

- **Static linkage report**: the outcome of a static linkage check. It reports
  zero or more static linkage errors.

- **Static linkage errors**: a reported error for a reference as the result of
  a static linkage check.
  A static linkage error contains the information on the source class and
  the destination class of the reference. Each static linkage error has
  one of the three types:

  - _Missing class type_ is the error when where the destination class of a
    class reference does not exist in the linkage classpath. This error
    happens when a class is removed in a different version of a library,
    or there is a dependency missed when constructing the linkage classpath.
    The reference that causes a missing class error is called a _dangling reference_.

  - _Missing method type_ is the error when a method reference has a  static
    linkage conflict.

  - _Missing field type_ is the error when a field reference has a static
     linkage conflict.

> - **Linkage classpath**: the classpath which a static linkage check

Author: Removed "linkage classpath" from glossary. Yes, it's only needed for the tool.

  runs against. For a Maven project, a linkage classpath consists of the
  project's class files and the transitive dependencies induced by the direct
  dependencies in the project's pom.xml file.

> - **Class usage graph**: a directed graph that represents the relationship between

Author: Yes, it's cyclic. Updated.

Added description:

> To avoid unnecessary graph traversal, self-loops (references between the same class) are omitted.

>   classes in the linkage classpath. The nodes (vertex) of the graph correspond to

Author: Updated

  Java classes and the directed edges are references between classes.
  For example, when 'Class A' has reference to 'Class B' on calling a method X,
  the class usage graph holds an edge between two nodes:

  ```

>   [Class A] --(method X of class B)-> [Class B]

Reviewer 3: There can be multiple paths from A to B under this definition.

Author: Yes, multiple edges between two classes are normal. Clarified in the document.

Such _parallel edges_ are supported in Guava's [Network](https://github.com/google/guava/wiki/GraphsExplained#network)

  ```

  In this case, 'Class A' is called the _source class_ of the reference and
  'Class B' is called the _destination class_.

- **A reference**: in the class usage graph, the relationship between two 
  classes is either _class reference_, _method reference_ or _field reference_.

>   A _method reference_ indicates that the source class uses the (static or

Reviewer 3: uses --> invokes

Author: Updated

  non-static) method of the destination class.

>   A _field reference_ indicates that the source class accesses the (static or

Reviewer 3: the (static --> a (static

Author: Updated

  non-static) field of the destination class.

  A _class reference_ indicates that the source class uses the destination
  class without referencing a specific field or method (e.g., class inheritance).

>   A reference is called to have a _linkage conflict_

Reviewer 3: called --> said

>   when there is a static linkage conflict caused by the reference.

Reviewer 3: This definition is circular. Maybe, "when the target of the reference is not found" but then that requires the target node to be a field or a method, not just a class. I'm not sure what to do here.

Author: Removed the sentence. I couldn't find good sentence here. "Static linkage error" section explains the concept.

- **Reachability** is the attribute of static linkage errors to indicate
  whether a linkage error caused by a reference is _reachable_ from the _entry

>   point classes_ of the class usage graph. In other words, when a static

Reviewer 3: entry point classes are separate from the class usage graph, not part of it.

Author: Removed from "of the class usage graph".

  linkage error is _reachable_, there exists a path of references in the graph
  from one of the entry point classes to the reference causing linkage error.

>   The path helps to diagnose why static linkage errors are introduced to the

Reviewer 3: why --> how

Author: Updated

  linkage classpath.

> - **Entry point Classes** are classes in the class usage graph that are used

Reviewer 3: " are classes in the class usage graph that are used" --> classes used

- **Linkage-matchable version** (said of a particular version of A in relation
  to all versions of B): There exists some version of B such that the version of
  A and the version of B are linkage-compatible.

### Static Linkage Checking

> - **Static linkage**: a reference from a class to another class that is

Reviewer: I think we should just treat "static" as a modifier for other terms, and not define "static linkage" at all.

  statically found in the Java class file of the former class.

> - **Static linkage error**: a linkage error for a static linkage.

Reviewer: Just define this as a sub-type of "linkage error".

- **Static linkage check**: a process to identify the existence of _static
  linkage conflicts_ for a given classpath, by scanning Java classes and
  verifying the availability in the classpath.

- **Class usage graph**: a possibly cyclic directed graph of references between classes
  in the classpath. The nodes (vertices) of the graph correspond to
  Java classes and the directed edges are references between classes.

>   For example, when 'Class A' has reference to 'Class B' on calling a method X,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, when 'Class A' has invokes method X on 'Class B',
```

>   the class usage graph holds an edge between two nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the class usage graph holds an edge between the two nodes:
```

  ```
  [Class A] --(method X of class B)-> [Class B]
  ```

  In this case, 'Class A' is called the _source class_ of the reference and
  'Class B' is called the _destination class_.

  In general, there can be multiple (parallel) edges between two nodes when
  a class references two or more methods and fields of another class.
  Self-loops (references between the same class) are possible and
  common. However, it is safe to omit such references during static linkage checks,
  because the Java compiler ensures that the self-loop references are linkage compatible.

> - **A reference**: in the class usage graph, the relationship between two 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Reference**: in the class usage graph, the relationship between two 
```

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't actually define a reference, it only says that there are sub-types. Could we give it a self-contained, one sentence definition?

Author: Added. What do you think?

  classes is either a _class reference_, _method reference_ or _field reference_.

  A _method reference_ indicates that the source class invokes a (static or

>   non-static) method of the destination class.

Reviewer: Maybe move the "static or non-static" to the end so we don't have a parenthetical in the middle. e.g. "the source class invokes a method of the destination class, which can be static or non-static."

Author: Removed "static or non-static"

  A _field reference_ indicates that the source class accesses a (static or
  non-static) field of the destination class.

  A _class reference_ indicates that the source class uses the destination
  class without referencing a specific field or method (e.g., class inheritance).

- **Reachability** is the attribute of classes (nodes in the graph)
  and references (edges in the graph) to indicate whether they are
  _reachable_ from a class. For example, when a reference that causes
  a linkage error is marked as _reachable_ from 'Class A', it means that
  there exists a path of edges in the class usage graph from 'Class A'

>   to the reference causing linkage error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to the reference causing a linkage error.
```

Author: Fixed

- **Linkage-matchable version** (said of a particular version of A in relation
  to all versions of B): There exists some version of B such that the version of
  A and the version of B are linkage-compatible.

> ### Class usage graph

Author: Class reference graph.

- **Class usage graph**: a possibly cyclic directed graph of references

>   between classes. The nodes (vertices) of the graph correspond to

Author: bullet points.

- Each node is a Java class
- Each edge re...

- **Linkage-matchable version** (said of a particular version of A in relation
  to all versions of B): There exists some version of B such that the version of
  A and the version of B are linkage-compatible.

### Class usage graph

> - **Class usage graph**: a possibly cyclic directed graph of references between classes

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure the terms related to the graph and reachability are general enough to go into the glossary. They're relevant to the "reachability" notion in the static linkage checker, so maybe should be defined there.

Reviewer 2: And there we can maybe just simply say something like:

Only linkage errors that are reachable through some sequence of method calls, field accesses, and class literal references from the entry point set are reported.

(We will actually report more than that for now because we assume everything in a class is reached when anything is, but we could actually narrow it down to that set later, and that would be ideal.)

Reviewer: I would prefer to keep these terms in the glossary in case we reference them outside of the static linkage checker (which I feel is pretty likely). Even if not, I think it's best for all terms to be defined in one place so that they are easier to find.

Author: To discuss tomorrow.

  in the classpath. The nodes (vertices) of the graph correspond to
  Java classes and the directed edges are references between classes.
  For example, when 'Class A' invokes method X on 'Class B',
  the class usage graph holds an edge between the two nodes:

  ```
  [Class A] --(method X of class B)-> [Class B]
  ```

>   In this case, 'Class A' is called the _source class_ of the reference and

Reviewer 2: Should we call these "using class" and "referenced class"?

Author: "referenced class" sounds good. But "using class" doesn't for me.

How about "source class" and "referenced class"?

Author: Now it's 'source class' and 'target class' to follow terms in Guava Graph.

  'Class B' is called the _destination class_.

  In general, there can be multiple (parallel) edges between two nodes when
  a class references two or more methods and fields of another class.
  Self-loops (references between the same class) are possible and

>   common. However, it is safe to omit such references when checking the reachability

Reviewer 2: Again, here, we're leaking implementation considerations for the static linkage checker into a glossary.

Author: Right. Removed "However..."

  In general, there can be multiple (parallel) edges between two nodes when
  a class references two or more methods and fields of another class.
  Self-loops (references between the same class) are possible and
  common. However, it is safe to omit such references when checking the reachability
  to static linkage errors, because the Java compiler ensures that the self-loop
  references are linkage compatible.

> - **Reference**: a relationship from a class to another class on how the former

Reviewer: How about: "A relationship from one class to another class such that the first class requires the presence the second class in a particular form in order to function."

Author: Updated.
Still this part is not 100% sure though >  "in a particular form in order to function"
